Privacy Considerations: Editorial Improvements (#286)
ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture: draft-ietf-scitt-architecture.md

# Privacy Considerations

> Transparency Services MAY support anonymous access, Issuers MUST ensure Signed Statements submitted to public access services are acceptable for public disclosure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transparency Services MAY support anonymous access. Issuers MUST ensure Signed Statements submitted to public access services are acceptable for public disclosure.
```

> Transparency Services may be publicly accessible and Issuers should in those cases treat Signed Statements (rendering them as Transparent Statements) as publicly accessible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transparency Services may be publicly accessible and Issuers should in those cases treat Signed Statements as publicly accessible.
```

> In this case, a Signed Statement Envelope and Statement payload should not carry any confidential information in the clear.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, a Signed Statement Envelope and Statement payload MUST NOT carry confidential information.
```

Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log.

> For a practial deployment a Relaying Party, such as an Auditor, will have to get access also to the Signed Statements, which are made available through an adjacent system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some deployments, a Relaying Party, such as an Auditor, MAY require access to Signed Statements and Statements, which can be made available through adjacent services.
```

> Transparency Services MUST enforce access control to the Append-only Log.

Reviewer 3: In _most_ scenarios, I'd agree writes should be gated, but there are scenarios where all events would be written. For reads, most scenarios likely don't require access control, other than a means to apply throttling.

Reviewer 4: Access control does not mean you cannot have anonymous read or write, just that you have means to control it. I have worked on many systems that a have notion of anonymous read or read for unauthenticated access scenarios. Does that mean those systems, writ large, don't have access control?

There also appears to be informative and useful context in the edits about the last requirement on line 692. Is your criticism about this requirement specifically or all the edits as a whole?

Reviewer 3: @aj-stein-nist, I agree access control does not mean it can't also support anonymity. However, as written with "MUST", it does imply this, which is what I'm basic my objection to this line, as written. However, you are also correct that I had concerns with the generality of the additions as we've worked hard to reduce the ledger to recording cryptographic hashes of the content (signed statements, statements/aka payload/aka content) directly on the ledger.

> Transparency Services may enforce access control to the Append-only Log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transparency Services MUST enforce access control to the Append-only Log.
```

# Privacy Considerations

Transparency Services MAY support anonymous access.

> Issuers MUST ensure Signed Statements submitted to public access services are acceptable for public disclosure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Issuers SHOULD ensure Signed Statements submitted to public access services are acceptable for public disclosure.
```

Reviewer 3: Option 2, changing should to SHOULD for the original text
```suggestion
Issuers SHOULD treat Signed Statements (rendering them as Transparent Statements) as publicly accessible.
```

Reviewer 5: I liked OPTION 1 from Steve, because only Transparency Service with  public access is allowed public disclosure.

There may be a specific deployment where only designated actors may have access, with one the designated actor is an Auditor. There the Privacy considerations may vastly differ from others!

In this case, Signed Statements MUST NOT carry confidential information.
Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log.

> In some deployments, a Relaying Party, such as an Auditor, might require access to Signed Statements and Statements, which can be made available through adjacent services.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In some deployments, a special role, such as an Auditor, might require access to Signed Statements.
```

Reviewer 5: The statement about adjacent services is `ambigous` and I suggest we remove it!

> Note, however, the Transparency Services only stores the hash values, which only leads to minimal information leakage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Transparency Services MUST enforce access control to the Append-only Log.

Author: ```suggestion
Transparency Services will typically enforce access control to the Append-only Log.
```

Author: Agree with what AJ said regarding access control. Still updated the text to make it less controversial.

Reviewer 3: If others +1, I'll commit the suggestion, or @hannestschofenig since this is your PR, feel free to commit yourself.

Reviewer 3: I would LGTM with this change, and the removal of the text below

> Transparency Services may enforce access control to the Append-only Log. While this can be used to limit who can read the Log, it may also reduce the usefulness of the system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Transparency Services may enforce access control to the Append-only Log.
While this can be used to limit who can read the Log, it may also reduce the usefulness of the system.
```

# Privacy Considerations

Transparency Services may be publicly accessible and Issuers should in those cases treat Signed Statements (rendering them as Transparent Statements) as publicly accessible.
In this case, a Signed Statement Envelope and Statement payload should not carry any confidential information in the clear.
Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log.

> Note, however, the Transparency Services only stores the hash values, which only leads to minimal information leakage.

Reviewer 6: This is one possible implementation, as a result this is not something we can require.  I think you are pointing out that auditing the log which only holds hashes has one concern, but if the signed statement is flowing across the network that whole remains.  This then gets into a discussion of COSE Hashed Envelope and whether this is used to mask artifacts.

Author: @roywill Please suggest text on how you want your feedback to be addressed.

For a practial deployment a Relaying Party, such as an Auditor, will have to get access also to the Signed Statements, which are made available through an adjacent system.

Transparency Services may enforce access control to the Append-only Log.

> While this can be used to limit who can read the Log, it may also reduce the usefulness of the system.

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest removing this section as issuer may need to keep proprietary information private, but need to record statements demonstrating their adherence to compliance requirements. Auditors/verifiers can be given access to the private information if/when needed. 
Stating it may reduce usefulness could discourage users from writing important information that would be needed to track their adhearance.
```suggestion
```

# Privacy Considerations

> Transparency Services may be publicly accessible and Issuers should in those cases treat Signed Statements (rendering them as Transparent Statements) as publicly accessible. In this case, a Signed Statement Envelope and Statement payload should not carry any confidential information in the clear. Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log.

Reviewer 7: Strictly speaking the *highly* immutable / non-removable bit according to the tech stack we've defined is only a hash. There are plausible deniability arguments to be made for even not wanting a hash of embarrassing or incriminating content on an immutable append-only log but I don't think those are in scope of SCITT.

Author: Good point. This should be noted in there.

Author: I have added text to clarify this aspect.

> Transparency Services may be publicly accessible and Issuers should in those cases treat Signed Statements (rendering them as Transparent Statements) as publicly accessible. In this case, a Signed Statement Envelope and Statement payload should not carry any confidential information in the clear. Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log. Note, however, the Transparency Services only stores the hash values, which only leads to a minimal information leakage. For a practial deployment a Relaying Party, such as an Auditor, will have to get access also to the Signed Statements, which are made available through an adjacent system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Transparency Services may be publicly accessible and Issuers should in those cases treat Signed Statements (rendering them as Transparent Statements) as publicly accessible.
In this case, a Signed Statement Envelope and Statement payload should not carry any confidential information in the clear.
Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log.
Note, however, the Transparency Services only stores the hash values, which only leads to minimal information leakage.
For a practial deployment a Relaying Party, such as an Auditor, will have to get access also to the Signed Statements, which are made available through an adjacent system.
```

# Privacy Considerations

Transparency Services MAY support anonymous access.
Issuers SHOULD ensure Signed Statements submitted to public access services are acceptable for public disclosure.

> In this case, Signed Statements MUST NOT carry confidential information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Publicly accessible Signed Statements MUST NOT carry confidential information.
```

> Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log.

Reviewer 2: This is a strange way to say that Log integrity is tamper protected.

> Once a Signed Statement is inserted into the Append-only Log maintained by a Transparency Service, it cannot be removed from the Log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a Signed Statement is registered, it cannot be removed from the Log.
```
